{\rtf1\ansi\deff0{\fonttbl{\f0 \fswiss Helvetica;}{\f1 \fmodern Courier;}}
{\colortbl;\red255\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;}
\widowctrl\hyphauto

{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Last Update: 8/4/2025\line An Overview of the Learning Sciences\line By Jonan Phillip Donaldson, Ph.D.\line History of the Learning Sciences\line The learning sciences started to take shape in the late 1980s, but it was in 1991 and 1992 that it became a field with a unique identity. It was in those years that the first learning sciences program was built by Roger Schank and launched at Northwestern University, the first issues of the Journal of the Learning Sciences were edited by Janet Kolodner and published, and the first conference (the International Conference of the Learning Sciences) was held.\line Before the 1980s, research on learning resided within various established disciplines like psychology, education, and computer science. While these fields tackled learning -related questions, their research methods and perspectives often remained focused wi thin their own boundaries. This led to fragmented knowledge and limited understanding of the complex interaction of cognitive, social, and technological factors influencing learning. Traditional educational research often focused on isolated aspects of learning, frequently using reductionist methods. Early Learning Scientists saw the need for a more holistic, integrated approach that considers the complexity of learning environments, social interactions, cultural contexts, and technological advancements. They wanted to bridge the gap between different disciplines and draw insights from various angles to create a comprehensive understanding of learning processes.\line There was a growing d issatisfaction with traditional educational research paradigms . Many early learning scientists were influenced by cognitive science and saw limitations in applying traditional educational research methods alone to understand the complex cognitive and social processes involved in learning. They wanted to combine scienti fic approaches from psychology , complexity sciences, computer science to study learning. In short, the field came together around the proposition that learning is extremel y complex and messy, and that any attempt to reduce the complexity will impede learning.\line There was also a growing recognition that learning extends beyond formal classroom settings. The Learning Sciences emphasized situated learning, where knowledge and skills are understood as being deeply embedded in their context of use. This perspective encouraged the st udy of learning in a variety of environments. With the expansion of computer technologies in education, learning scientists saw opportunities to study how these technologies could transform and support new forms of learning. This required ne w research lenses.\line Foundational Theoretical Influences\line The learning sciences drew from several key theoretical traditions that shaped its early development. Among the most influential were Social Constructivist Theory (Vygotsky) , which became a core LS principle by emphasizing the fundamentally social nature of learning through cultural mediation and collaborative interaction. Situated Learning Theory (Lave & Wenger) emerged as another core principle, challenging abstract educational approaches by demonstrating that learning occurs through legitimate peripheral participation in communities of practice. Cognitive Apprenticeship Theory (Collins, Brown, & Newman) , developed by one of the field\u8217's founders, became central to the learning sciences by making invisible thinking processes visible through modeling and scaffolding.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 The field also embraced Constructionist Theory (Papert) , which extended constructivism by emphasizing learning through creating meaningful artifacts \u8212-a principle that became core to technology -enhanced learning approaches. Additionally, Distributed Cognition (Hutchins) provided crucial insights into how thinking extends beyond individual minds to include tools, environments, and social interactions, fundamentally shaping how learning scientists understand collaborative learning environments.\line Learning is Complex and Messy\line Learning is studied as systems and ecosystems . The learning sciences views learning as complex systems with multiple interacting elements rather than isolated variables. This includes studying learners in authentic contexts.\line Complex Systems and Emergent Phenomena in Learning:\line Learning is viewed as a dynamic, complex system where interactions at different levels (individual, group, organizational) lead to emergent properties and behaviors. This perspective challenges reductionist approaches to understanding learning.\line Complex Systems Theory has become recognized as a core LS principle that fundamentally shapes how learning scientists approach research and design. This theory models phenomena composed of many interacting elements whose aggregate behavior exhibits emergen t properties that cannot be predicted from individual components alone. In learning contexts, this means that educational outcomes emerge from the complex interactions between learners, tools, social structures, cultural contexts, and environmental factors rather than from any single variable or intervention.\line This theoretical foundation explains why learning scientists reject reductionist approaches that attempt to isolate individual variables. Instead, the field embraces studying learning in its full complexity, recognizing that simplifying or controlling away complexity often eliminates the very phenomena of interest. Complex systems thinking supports the learning sciences\u8217' commitment to design -based research in authentic environments where multiple factors can interact naturally.\line Expansive Learning Theory :\line In Expansive Learning Theory (Engestr\u246?m) based on Cultural -Historical Activity Theory (CHAT), learning is framed as a collective, transformative process of resolving internal contradictions within an activity system (e.g., a workplace, a school). Learning is not just about internalizing existing knowledge but about creating new cultural tools and practices \u8212-expanding the object and possibilities of the activity. The cycle of expansive learning involves questioning current practices, analyzing their historica l and systemic contradictions, modeling a new solution, and implementing and reflecting on that new model. The learning sciences applies this framework to understand and facilitate organizational change and workplace learning, using methodologies like the Change Laboratory to help participants co -design new ways of working. It shifts the focus from individual cognition to collective, historically -developing, and object -oriented activity.\line Focus on Design\line The learning sciences strongly focuses on design -based research to engineer, iterate and validate new learning environments and tech to support learning in context. Design Sciences and Design Thinking have emerged as a core LS principle, providing both methodological approaches and theoretical frameworks for the field. The design sciences frame educational research as a deliberate attempt to\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 generate actionable knowledge for creating effective learning environments. This goes beyond simply studying existing educational practices to actively engineering new possibilities for learning.\line This theoretical commitment to design distinguishes learning sciences from traditional educational research that often focuses on evaluating existing practices. Instead, learning scientists see themselves as simultaneously researchers and designers, creati ng innovations while studying how and why they work. This design orientation connects directly to the field\u8217's commitment to addressing real -world educational challenges through iterative improvement of learning environments and tools.\line The design sciences perspective also emphasizes the importance of understanding both the intended and unintended consequences of educational designs, leading to more sophisticated approaches to studying technology -enhanced learning environments and collabo rative learning systems.\line Design -Based Research:\line Learning Sciences often employ design -based research methodologies, which involve iterative cycles of designing, implementing, analyzing, and redesigning learning environments and tools. This approach was initiated by the early learning scientist s Ann Brown and Allan Collins. It is pragmatic and focused on real - world educational practice, aiming to bridge theory and practice.\line Socio -Cultural Orientation\line There is an emphasis on studying learning as a process mediated by cultural artifacts, tools, language and social contexts. The socio -cultural context is crucial.\line Cultural -Historical Perspectives:\line The field acknowledges the influence of cultural and historical contexts on learning. Learners\u8217' backgrounds, values, and experiences are seen as integral to their learning processes. Cultural -Historical Activity Theory (CHAT - Engestr\u246?m) has become recognized as a core LS principle that extends Vygotsky\u8217's foundational work. Yrj\u246? Engestr\u246?m\u8217's CHAT provides learning scientists with sophisticated tools for analyzing how learning occurs th rough participation in complex activity systems involving multiple actors, tools, rules, communities, and divisions of labor.\line CHAT helps learning scientists understand how contradictions within and between activity systems drive expansive learning \u8212-where learners and communities don\u8217't just acquire existing knowledge but collectively create new knowledge and practices. This theoreti cal framework has been particularly influential in understanding workplace learning, educational change processes, and how technology mediates learning in complex organizational contexts.\line The theory\u8217's emphasis on contradictions as drivers of learning aligns with the learning sciences\u8217' interest in productive failure and the role of struggle in learning processes. CHAT provides a framework for understanding how apparent problems or conflicts in learning environments can actually catalyze deeper learning and systemic change.\line Situated Learning:\line Learning Sciences emphasize that learning is contextually situated and deeply embedded in specific environments and social contexts. This contrasts with traditional views of learning as a decontextualized, individual cognitive process. The theory posits th at knowledge is inseparable from the contexts and activities within which it is acquired and used.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Social Constructivism and Collaboration:\line Building on Vygotsky\u8217's work, the Learning Sciences prioritize social interactions and collaborative processes as crucial for learning. Knowledge construction is seen as a collaborative endeavor, where learners actively construct understanding through inter action with others and their environment.\line Embodied and Distributed Cognition:\line Recognizing that cognition is not confined to an individual\u8217's mind, Learning Sciences explore how thinking is distributed across people, tools, and environments, and how bodily experiences can shape cognitive processes. This contribution to the learning sciences was developed by learning scientists investigating computer -supported collaborative learning , and Timothy Koschmann and Gerry Stahl were the most prominent. Distributed Cognition (Hutchins) represents a core LS principle that fundamentally reconcept ualizes thinking as a process spread across people, artifacts, and environments rather than contained within individual minds. Edwin Hutchins\u8217' work has profoundly influenced how learning scientists understand collaboration, tool use, and the social nature of cognition in learning environments.\line This theoretical framework helps explain how learning occurs in technology -rich environments where cognitive work is shared between humans and computational tools. It provides insights into how knowledge becomes embedded in artifacts, practices, and social structures, and how learning involves becoming skilled at coordinating with these distributed cognitive resources.\line Distributed cognition theory supports the learning sciences\u8217' emphasis on authentic learning environments where learners work with real tools and participate in genuine communities of practice. It helps explain why traditional classroom learning, which isolates learners from the distributed cognitive systems they\u8217'll eventually join, often fails to prepare learners f or real -world cognitive work.\line Inquiry and Knowledge -Building\line Core concepts of knowledge -building, inquiry -based models of reasoning and lifelong learning are important frameworks to study continued learning.\line Knowledge Building as Core Principle :\line Knowledge Building (Scardamalia & Bereiter) has emerged as a core LS principle that fundamentally reimagines learning as a community\u8217's collective advancement of understanding rather than individual knowledge acquisition. Marlene Scardamalia and Carl Bereit er\u8217's theory has shaped how learning scientists understand collaborative knowledge construction and the role of technology in supporting collective inquiry.\line Knowledge building theory emphasizes that learners should engage in authentic knowledge work \u8212-the kind of collaborative knowledge advancement that occurs in research communities, design teams, and other knowledge -creating organizations. This involves treati ng ideas as improvable objects that can be built upon, criticized, and refined through collective effort.\line This theoretical framework has been particularly influential in the development of computer -supported collaborative learning environments and in understanding how technology can support sustained knowledge building discourse. It provides a theoretical foun dation for designing learning environments that engage learners in genuine knowledge creation rather than just knowledge consumption or individual construction.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Cognitive Constructivism:\line Cognitive constructivism, as conceptualized by Jean Piaget, focuses on how individuals construct their own understanding and knowledge of the world, through experiencing things and reflecting on those experiences. Piaget proposed that learning is a process of active construction rather than passive absorption of information. Knowledge is not passively received from the environment, but actively constructed by the learner. Learners build new knowledge by integrating new information or experiences into their existing knowledge and mental frameworks (called schemas). This theory posits that learners go through a series of stages of cognitive development, wherein they develop schemas \u8212-internal models of understanding based on interactions with the environment. These schemas evolve through two key processes: assimilation, where new experiences are incorporated into existing schemas, and accommodation, where schemas are modified to accommodate new experiences. Piaget\u8217's model emphasizes the individual\u8217's active role i n the process of knowledge construction, highlighting that learning is deeply personal and internally driven. This perspective contrasts with Vygotsky\u8217's social constructivism, which places a greater emphasis on the influence of social interactions and cult ure in the construction of knowledge. While Cognitive Constructivist Theory (Piaget) is widely used in learning sciences discourse, it is considered peripheral to core LS principles rather than foundational. Piaget\u8217's focus on individual cognitive developme nt and stage -based learning, while influential historically, does not align as strongly with the learning sciences\u8217' emphasis on social, situated, and collaborative learning processes. The field has moved toward theories that better account for the social, cultural, and contextual dimensions of learning that Piaget\u8217's individual -focused framework doesn\u8217't fully address.\line Constructionism and Productive Failure :\line Rooted in the work of Seymour Papert, this idea extends constructivism, emphasizing the importance of learners actively creating tangible, meaningful products as a central process of learning. This hands -on approach to learning underscores the value of learners being creators, not just consumers, of knowledge. In constructionism, learning involves tinkering, exploration, making, learner agency, and learner interest. More recently, Manu Kapur contributed new theoretical understanding of the role productive failure plays in the le arning process.\line Productive Failure Theory (Kapur) has emerged as a core LS principle that challenges traditional assumptions about optimal instructional sequencing. Manu Kapur\u8217's research demonstrates that learners who struggle to generate solutions before formal instructi on often learn more effectively than those who receive direct instruction first. This theory provides new insights into the role of failure and struggle in learning processes.\line Productive failure theory suggests that the process of attempting to solve problems before having the necessary knowledge or skills can be highly beneficial for learning, even when (or especially when) these attempts fail. The struggle itself appears to pr epare learners to better understand and benefit from subsequent instruction. This aligns with the learning sciences\u8217' emphasis on active learning and challenges more directive instructional approaches.\line This theoretical contribution has important implications for the design of learning environments and the sequencing of learning activities. It suggests that well -designed failure experiences can be more educational than immediate success, providing a theor etical foundation for designing learning environments that embrace rather than avoid productive struggle.\line Cognitive Tools and Scaffolding:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Learning sciences emphasize the use of cognitive tools and scaffolding to support learning. These tools can range from concept maps to digital platforms, aiding learners in processing, organizing, and representing knowledge. Scaffolding takes many forms as well, but one of the important contributions in the early days of the learning sciences was the idea of cognitive apprenticeship. Cognitive apprenticeship is an instructional model for teaching developed by Allan Collins (one of the founders of the field) that emphasizes the process of learning and using cognitive skills through guided experience (modeling, coaching, articulation, reflection).\line Reflection, Metacognition , Feedback, and Self -Regulated Learning:\line The field underscores the importance of learners\u8217' awareness and regulation of their own learning processes. Metacognitive skills, such as planning, monitoring, and evaluating one\u8217's own understanding, are key components of effective learning strategies. Reflecting on learning experiences through receiving constructive feedback are seen as essential for ongoing growth and development.\line Identity and Perspectives\line The role of identity is another important unique perspective in the learning sciences . The learning sciences views identity, in terms of both self -concept and social affiliation, as crucial to the process of human development and lifespan learning trajectories. Researchers study how different learning environments and activities affect identi fy exploration, identity workspaces, development of possible selves, and long -term identity growth. This includes identity exploration, possible selves, social affiliati ons and identity within communities of practice, interest and passion development, and conceptual change closely tied to identity shifts.\line Identity as Central to Learning:\line In the Learning Sciences, learning is not just about acquiring knowledge or skills but also involves the development and transformation of one\u8217's identity. This aligns with the idea of learning as \u8220"becoming.\u8221" Learners are seen as actively constructing their identities through their engagement in learning activities and social interactions. Recently, some learning scientists are starting to use the dynamic systems model of role identity (developed by Avi Kaplan and Goanna Garner) to understand the complexity of identity development.\line The Dynamic Systems Model of Role Identity (DSMRI - Kaplan & Garner) represents an emerging theoretical framework that is widely used but considered peripheral to core LS principles. This theory conceptualizes identity as a self -organizing system where mul tiple factors interact dynamically to shape how learners see themselves in various roles. While not yet a core principle, DSMRI provides learning scientists with sophisticated tools for understanding the complexity of identity development in learning conte xts. The DSMRI framework helps explain how learners\u8217' identities in specific roles (like \u8220"student,\u8221" \u8220"scientist,\u8221" or \u8220"writer\u8221") emerge from the dynamic interaction of beliefs, values, goals, and social contexts. This theoretical perspective supports the learning sciences\u8217' interest in long -term learning trajecto ries and the development of domain -specific identities that support continued engagement in learning communities.\line Critical Pedagogy, Critical Consciousness , and Empowerment:\line Critical pedagogy plays an increasingly important role in the interdisciplinary learning sciences . Learning Sciences emphasize the development of critical consciousness \u8211- an awareness of one\u8217's social, cultural, and political context \u8211- as part of identity development. This empowers learners to understand and\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 question societal structures, and to see themselves as capable of enacting change. Critical pedagogy seeks to empower learners to question and transform the social, political, and cultural structures that influence their lives. This aligns with the Learning Sciences\u8217' focus on learner agency and the development of critical consciousness a s part of the learning process. Critical pedagogy challenges traditional, hierarchical teacher -student relationships, advocating for more democratic and participatory forms of education. This perspective resonates with the Learning Sciences\u8217' emphasis on collaborative and situated learning, where learners are co -constructors of knowledge. Critical pedagogy emphasizes the importance of recognizing and valuing the diverse cultural backgrounds and experiences of learners , including culturally responsive and inclusive education . This approach aligns with the Learning Sciences\u8217' focus on designing inclusive learning environments that respect and integrate learners\u8217' diverse identities\line and experiences.\line Figured Worlds:\line The concept of \u8220"figured worlds ,\u8221" developed by the cultural anthropologist Dorothy Holland and imported into the learning sciences , along with related ideas about social imagery and shared understandings , have also been influential perspectives in the learning sciences . A \u8220"figured world\u8221" refers to socioculturally -influenced lenses or simplified mental models of the world that people use to interpret various phenomena, texts, social interactions, concepts etc. These shaped perspectives act as sensemaking fram es. In the context of learning, participating in a figured world involves engaging with specific sets of activities, roles, and relationships. Through this participation, learners absorb and contribute to the shared understandings and practices of that world. For instance, a science classroom can be a figured world where students learn to engage with the practices, language, and norms of the scientific community. Figured worlds are also spaces where power dynamics and social inequities play out. Recognizing and addressing these dynamics is crucial in creating equitable learning environments. Learners from marginalized backgrounds may face figured worlds that are less accessible or hospitable to their ways of knowing and being, impacting their learning experi ences and identity formation.\line Engagement in figured worlds is not just about conforming to existing narratives and roles. Learners can also exercise agency, challenging and reshaping these worlds. This aspect is particularly important in fostering critical consciousness and empowering learners to become active agents in their learning and in broader societal contexts.\line Technology to Transform Learning\line The learning sciences exploits technology as a means to transform and enhance learning. This includes media for representation, collaboration tools, AI -based cognitive tutors, virtual worlds etc.\line The learning sciences\u8217' approach to technology differs fundamentally from traditional educational technology that simply digitizes existing educational practices. Instead, learning scientists view technology as having the potential to transform learning by enabling entirely new forms of interaction, collaboration, and knowledge construction that would be impossible without technological mediation.\line This transformative perspective is grounded in the field\u8217's core theoretical commitments to distributed cognition, where technology becomes an integral part of cognitive systems rather than merely a tool. Technologies like computer -supported collaborative l earning environments, knowledge building platforms, and immersive virtual worlds create new possibilities for the kinds of learning experiences that align with learning sciences principles.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 The field\u8217's emphasis on design -based research has been crucial in developing and studying these transformative uses of technology, leading to innovations in areas like adaptive learning systems, collaborative inquiry platforms, and augmented reality learni ng environments.\line Technological Affordances for Learning:\line The field recognizes and explores the potential of various technologies to support and transform learning. This includes digital tools and environments, which can facilitate new forms of interaction, collaboration, and access to information.\line Multiple Units/ Timescales of Analysis\line Learning is studied across multiple levels from neural mechanisms up to institutional levels and over multiple timescales from milliseconds to years.\line The learning sciences\u8217' commitment to studying learning across multiple units and timescales reflects its complex systems theoretical foundation. This approach recognizes that learning phenomena emerge from interactions across different levels of analysis \u8212-from neural and cognitive processes operating on millisecond timescales, to social interactions occurring over minutes and hours, to identity development and community participation unfolding over months and years, to institutional and cultural changes oper ating over decades.\line This multi -level approach distinguishes learning sciences research from studies that focus on single levels of analysis. It requires sophisticated research methodologies that can capture interactions between micro -level cognitive processes and macro -level social and cultural factors. This systems perspective supports the field\u8217's rejection of simple cause -and-effect explanations of learning in favor of more complex understandings of how learning emerges from dynamic interactions across multiple scales.\line Multi -disciplinarity\line The learning sciences integrates multiple disciplines including cognitive science, computer science, education, design studies, anthropology and information sciences.\line Relationship to Other Theories\line The learning sciences exists within a broader landscape of theory, and learning scientists have developed nuanced relationships with theories from other traditions. Understanding these relationships helps clarify what makes the learning sciences distinctiv e as a field.\line Some widely known educational theories generate considerable debate within the learning sciences community. For example, Cognitive Load Theory (Sweller) focuses on managing the limitations of working memory during instruction, but many learning scientists question whether this individual cognitive focus adequately accounts for the social and cultural dimensions of learning that the field considers central. Similarly, Growth Mindset Theory (Dweck) emphasizes beliefs about the malleability of intelligence, bu t learning scientists debate whether focusing on individual mindsets adequately addresses the complex social and institutional factors that influence learning opportunities and outcomes.\line Multiple Intelligences Theory (Gardner) also generates discussion because, while it recognizes diverse forms of intelligence, many learning scientists find that it doesn\u8217't sufficiently account for how\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 intelligence is distributed across people, tools, and cultural practices rather than residing within individuals.\line Some educational theories are viewed as fundamentally incompatible with core learning sciences principles. Behaviorist Learning Theory (Skinner, Watson, Pavlov), which views learning as observable behavior change through conditioning, conflicts with the le arning sciences\u8217' emphasis on meaning - making, social construction, and the complexity of cognitive processes.\line Direct Instruction Theory and Learning Styles Theory are also seen as contradicting key assumptions because they tend to rely on reductionist approaches that the learning sciences explicitly rejects \u8212-either by reducing learning to mechanical information tra nsmission or by oversimplifying the complex, contextual nature of how people learn.\line Many theories are frequently cited in learning sciences research but are not considered foundational to the field\u8217's identity. These theories often provide useful insights but don\u8217't align fully with the learning sciences\u8217' emphasis on social, situated, and c ollaborative learning. Examples include traditional cognitive theories that focus primarily on individual mental processes without adequate attention to social and cultural mediation.\line This theoretical landscape demonstrates the learning sciences\u8217' commitment to certain core principles while maintaining critical engagement with broader educational theory. The field\u8217's theoretical foundation emphasizes social, situated, collaborative, and c omplex systems approaches to learning while being skeptical of theories that reduce learning to simple mechanisms or ignore its fundamentally social and cultural nature. This selective engagement reflects the field\u8217's evolution toward theories that can better account for the complexity and contextual nature of human learning.\par}
}
